---
title: "Homebrew, Nix, and pkgx"
meta_title: ""
description: "meta description"
date: 2025-01-23T05:00:00Z
image: "/images/posts/gear.jpg"
categories: ["vscode"]
authors: ["Bas Steins"]
tags: ["vscode", "python", "go", "javascript"]
draft: true
---

One reason, macOS is so popular among developers is the package manager Homebrew. It's a package manager for macOS that makes it easy to install, update, and manage software from a single place. It's like the App Store for macOS, but with everything in it, a developer needs.
Thousands of packages are available, and it's easy to install them with a simple command. 

Homebrew is widely adopted and faces some challenges as it grows: Developers setting up their machines with Homebrew may expect a similar experience on other platforms, for example when setting up their servers. There has been attempts with Linuxbrew, but is does not support ARM packages (which you would need to have when running a Docker container on an Apple Silicon Mac). It does not really feel linux-y for the most part.

Another issue that developers run into is separation of different environments. Homebrew installs everything in `/usr/local`, which can lead to conflicts between different versions of the same software. This is especially problematic when you are working on multiple projects that require different versions of the same software.

Homebrew is also strictly a imperative package manager. You tell it what to do, and it does it. There is no way to describe what you want, and let the package manager figure out how to get there. This does not well align with the declarative nature of modern infrastructure as code tools like Terraform, Ansible, or Nix.

Especially when setting up development environments, such as in devcontainers, a simple tool that can manage packages in a declarative way is very useful. 

The core developer of Homebrew, Max Howell, recently came up with a spiritual successor to Homebrew, called `pkgx`. It is a package manager that is inspired by Homebrew, but is designed to be more flexible and declarative. It is also designed to be cross-platform, so you can use it on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

Let's take a deeper dive.

### Homebrew vs pkgx

- as of version 2: standalone rust binary
- dedicated to manage environments
- global installation with pkgm
- package manifests in yaml, not ruby
- pre-built binaries for mac os (arm and intel), linux (arm and x86), windows (x86)
- version history

### pkgx vs Nix

- Nix is a functional package manager
- Nix is a full-fledged operating system (also)
- installation of packages is declaratively defined in a functional language
- no pre-builds (cachix exists)

### Conclusion